.TH FACELOCK 1 "2026-03-11" "facelock" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
facelock \- Linux face authentication
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B facelock
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B facelock
is a unified command-line tool for Linux face authentication. It handles
face enrollment, authentication, daemon management, camera preview,
benchmarking, and system setup. The companion PAM module
.BR pam_facelock (8)
connects to the facelock daemon or spawns
.B facelock auth
to perform face-based authentication for system services such as
.BR sudo (8)
and login managers.
.PP
All face recognition inference runs locally using ONNX models (SCRFD for
detection and ArcFace for embedding). No cloud services are contacted.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B setup
Download models and create directories. An interactive wizard guides initial
configuration.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-systemd
Install and enable systemd units for the facelock daemon.
.TP
.B \-\-disable
Used with \fB\-\-systemd\fR: disable and stop systemd units instead.
.TP
.B \-\-pam
Install or manage PAM module configuration.
.TP
.B \-\-service \fIname\fR
Target PAM service (default: sudo).
.TP
.B \-\-remove
Remove the PAM line instead of adding it.
.TP
.B \-y\fR, \fB\-\-yes
Skip confirmation for sensitive services.
.TP
.B \-\-non\-interactive
Run in non-interactive mode (skip wizard).
.RE
.TP
.B enroll
Capture and store a face embedding for authentication.
.RS
.TP
.B \-u\fR, \fB\-\-user \fIusername\fR
Username to enroll (default: current user).
.TP
.B \-l\fR, \fB\-\-label \fIlabel\fR
Label for this face model.
.RE
.TP
.B remove \fImodel_id\fR
Remove a specific face model by its numeric ID.
.RS
.TP
.B \-u\fR, \fB\-\-user \fIusername\fR
Username (default: current user).
.TP
.B \-y\fR, \fB\-\-yes
Skip confirmation prompt.
.RE
.TP
.B clear
Remove all face models for a user.
.RS
.TP
.B \-u\fR, \fB\-\-user \fIusername\fR
Username (default: current user).
.TP
.B \-y\fR, \fB\-\-yes
Skip confirmation prompt.
.RE
.TP
.B list
List enrolled face models.
.RS
.TP
.B \-u\fR, \fB\-\-user \fIusername\fR
Username (default: current user).
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output as JSON.
.RE
.TP
.B test
Test face recognition against enrolled models for the current or specified user.
.RS
.TP
.B \-u\fR, \fB\-\-user \fIusername\fR
Username (default: current user).
.RE
.TP
.B preview
Live camera preview with face detection overlay.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-text\-only
Print detection results to stdout instead of graphical preview.
.TP
.B \-u\fR, \fB\-\-user \fIusername\fR
User to match faces against (defaults to current user).
.RE
.TP
.B config
Show or edit configuration.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-edit
Open config file in editor.
.RE
.TP
.B status
Check system status including daemon connectivity, enrolled faces, camera
availability, and model integrity.
.TP
.B devices
List available camera devices.
.TP
.B daemon
Run the persistent authentication daemon. Registers on the D-Bus system bus
as \fBorg.facelock.Daemon\fR to service authentication and enrollment requests
from the PAM module and CLI.
.RS
.TP
.B \-c\fR, \fB\-\-config \fIpath\fR
Path to config file.
.RE
.TP
.B auth
One-shot authentication (used by the PAM module). Exits with code 0 on
success or non-zero on failure.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-user \fIusername\fR
Username to authenticate (required).
.TP
.B \-\-config \fIpath\fR
Path to config file.
.RE
.TP
.B bench \fIsubcommand\fR
Benchmark and calibration tools.
.RS
.TP
.B cold\-auth
Measure cold auth latency (model load + first auth).
.TP
.B warm\-auth
Measure warm auth latency (models already loaded).
.TP
.B preview
Measure preview frame capture latency.
.TP
.B enrollment
Measure enrollment time.
.TP
.B model\-load
Measure ONNX model load time.
.TP
.B calibrate
Sweep thresholds and measure FAR/FRR.
.TP
.B report
Generate a comprehensive benchmark report.
.RE
.TP
.B tpm \fIsubcommand\fR
TPM integration status and management.
.RS
.TP
.B status
Report TPM availability and configuration.
.TP
.B seal\-key
Seal the AES encryption key with TPM (migrate keyfile to TPM).
.TP
.B unseal\-key
Unseal the AES key from TPM back to a plaintext keyfile (migrate TPM to keyfile).
.TP
.B pcr\-baseline
Display current PCR values for configured indices.
.RE
.TP
.B encrypt
Encrypt all unencrypted embeddings in the database with AES-256-GCM.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-generate\-key
Generate a new encryption key without encrypting embeddings.
.RE
.TP
.B decrypt
Decrypt all software-encrypted embeddings in the database.
.TP
.B restart
Restart the facelock daemon via systemd.
.TP
.B audit
View the structured audit log.
.RS
.TP
.B \-f\fR, \fB\-\-follow
Follow mode: watch for new log entries.
.TP
.B \-n\fR, \fB\-\-lines \fIcount\fR
Number of recent entries to show (default: 20).
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Controls log verbosity via the tracing/env_filter crate. Example:
.BR RUST_LOG=debug .
.TP
.B FACELOCK_CONFIG
Override path to the configuration file.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/facelock/config.toml
Main configuration file. Controls camera device, recognition thresholds,
daemon settings, security policy, and TPM options.
.TP
.I /var/lib/facelock/facelock.db
SQLite database storing face embeddings. Permissions should be 640, owned
by root:facelock.
.TP
.I /var/lib/facelock/models/
Directory containing ONNX model files (SCRFD and ArcFace). SHA256-verified
at load time. Permissions should be 644, owned by root:facelock.
.TP
.I /usr/share/dbus-1/system.d/org.facelock.Daemon.conf
D-Bus system bus policy file. Enforces deny-all default, allowing access only
to root and members of the \fBfacelock\fR group.
.TP
.I /usr/share/dbus-1/system-services/org.facelock.Daemon.service
D-Bus activation file for the facelock daemon service.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/security/pam_facelock.so
PAM module shared library.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (authentication passed, command completed).
.TP
.B non\-zero
Failure (authentication failed, error occurred).
.SH SECURITY
The default configuration requires an IR camera
.RB ( security.require_ir=true ).
Frame variance checks are performed during authentication to prevent
photo-based spoofing. Rate limiting is enforced by the daemon (5 attempts
per user per 60 seconds by default). IPC uses the D-Bus system bus; the
daemon verifies caller UID via
.B GetConnectionUnixUser
before executing any method, and the system bus policy in
.I org.facelock.Daemon.conf
applies a deny-all default, restricting access to root and the
.B facelock
group. Message size limits are enforced by the D-Bus daemon.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pam_facelock (8),
.BR pam (8),
.BR sudo (8)
