.TH PAM_FACELOCK 8 "2026-03-11" "pam_facelock" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
pam_facelock \- PAM module for face authentication
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pam_facelock.so
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pam_facelock
is a PAM module that provides face-based authentication for Linux systems.
It is a thin client that first attempts to connect to the
.BR facelock (1)
daemon via a Unix domain socket. If the daemon is unavailable, it falls back
to spawning
.B facelock auth
as a one-shot process.
.PP
The module is intentionally kept minimal with no heavy dependencies (no ONNX
runtime, no V4L2, no facelock-core). All inference is delegated to the daemon
or the facelock binary.
.PP
All authentication attempts are logged to syslog under the AUTH facility.
.SH MODULE TYPES PROVIDED
.TP
.B auth
This module performs face-based user authentication. It does not provide
account, session, or password management.
.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.B PAM_SUCCESS
The user's face was matched against an enrolled model with sufficient
confidence.
.TP
.B PAM_AUTH_ERR
Authentication failed. The face did not match any enrolled model, no face
was detected, or an error occurred during the authentication process.
.TP
.B PAM_IGNORE
The module is configured to be skipped for this authentication context,
or the user has no enrolled face models. This allows the PAM stack to
fall through to the next module.
.SH EXAMPLES
To enable face authentication for
.BR sudo (8),
add the following line to
.I /etc/pam.d/sudo
before the existing auth lines:
.PP
.RS
.nf
auth    sufficient    pam_facelock.so
.fi
.RE
.PP
This allows face authentication to succeed without requiring a password. If
face authentication fails or returns PAM_IGNORE, the next module in the PAM
stack (typically
.BR pam_unix (8))
will prompt for a password.
.PP
For stricter security, use
.B required
instead of
.BR sufficient :
.PP
.RS
.nf
auth    required    pam_facelock.so
.fi
.RE
.PP
The recommended way to manage PAM configuration is via the setup command:
.PP
.RS
.nf
facelock setup --pam --service sudo
.fi
.RE
.SH SECURITY
.SS IR Camera Requirement
By default, facelock requires an infrared (IR) camera for authentication
.RB ( security.require_ir=true
in the configuration file). IR cameras are resistant to photo-based spoofing
attacks. Do not disable this requirement unless you understand the security
implications.
.SS Anti-Spoofing
Frame variance checks are performed during authentication to detect
presentation attacks (e.g., holding a photo or video in front of the camera).
.SS Rate Limiting
The daemon enforces rate limiting (5 attempts per user per 60 seconds by
default) to prevent brute-force attacks.
.SS IPC Security
Communication between the PAM module and daemon uses a Unix domain socket
.RI ( /run/facelock/facelock.sock ).
Peer credentials are verified via
.B SO_PEERCRED
and message sizes are limited to 10MB.
.SS Syslog Logging
All authentication attempts (success, failure, and error) are logged to
syslog under the AUTH facility with the identifier
.IR pam_facelock .
.SH CONFIGURATION
The module reads its configuration from
.I /etc/facelock/config.toml
(or the path specified by the
.B FACELOCK_CONFIG
environment variable). Relevant configuration sections:
.TP
.B [pam]
PAM-specific settings including
.BR timeout_secs ,
.BR notification_mode ,
and
.BR skip_for_ssh .
.TP
.B [security]
Security settings including
.B require_ir
(default: true).
.TP
.B [daemon]
Daemon settings including
.B socket_path
(default: /run/facelock/facelock.sock).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/facelock/config.toml
Main configuration file.
.TP
.I /usr/lib/security/pam_facelock.so
The PAM module shared library.
.TP
.I /run/facelock/facelock.sock
Unix domain socket for daemon communication.
.TP
.I /var/lib/facelock/facelock.db
Face embedding database.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR facelock (1),
.BR pam (8),
.BR pam.conf (5),
.BR pam.d (5)
